title: Haxe Shop Announcement
author: fiene
description: You can now show your true colors by wearing Haxe t-shirts in our brand new shop.
background: haxe-mug.png
published: true
tags: announcements
disqusID: 35
---

Hey all,

We are super pleased to announce [our new t-shirt shop](https://haxe.org/foundation/shop)! You can now show your true colors (eight shades of orange) anywhere you want, anytime. You can be a Haxe advocate just by putting on a shirt. How cool is that?

This project has been long discussed and almost happened several times and then didn't. In the end, as usual, it took someone truly passionate about t-shirts to get it done. Don't get me wrong, we all like t-shirts. But none of us liked them enough to actually make taking the time to set up a shop a priority. So, thank you so much [David](https://github.com/damoebius) for taking the time to set it up and getting it done. If it were not for you, we still would not have any shirts with Haxe logos on them.

And truly, yes, shirts are awesome. I still wear my WWX shirts to sleep every now and then. They remind me of good times. I am looking forward to new designs to commemorate new things like the Haxe Summit in Seattle. While we are at it, how about a release shirt for Haxe 4.0?

Also, there’s finally a way to use all the awesome Haxe puns and slogans we’ve all been coming up with. All that red wine has to have been good for something. The ideas we can finally put on display! I can almost see a best-of shirt with GitHub issue comments. Almost.

So, show some flag. Become a true _Haxian_ and get a t-shirt...or a coffee mug!

> **[GOTO the Haxe shop now](https://haxe.org/foundation/shop)**
